so I received a challenge or a request
from a longtime viewer and supporter of
the channel Theo Theo comes up in
conversation a fair bit because he knows
the history of the videos have made in
the past so well I sometimes can't
remember where I said something and I
asked Theo didn't that once make a video
talking about this or that political
issue do you remember where that
happened and more often than not he does
his memory of my back catalog of videos
tends to better than mine and Theo has
said to me that I never made a video
really directly speaking to anarchism
and in my case that will be inevitably
speaking against anarchism as he knows
I'm not an anarchist I don't identify
with anarchism positively in any way so
let's really briefly expand on that
before get on the thing with the video
anarchism is partly a critique of the
status quo it's partly just a
description of the status quo with
analytical description of the status quo
in certain circumstances and then it's
partly an aspiration for a future system
of political organization a type of
future society I won't say utopia that
might be a little bit insulting to their
political tenancy you can certainly see
videos right now on YouTube of air casts
explaining to you exactly what type of
social organizations that want to have
in future etc etc whereas that third
category that they're dreaming about I
think that most people get drawn into
anarchism through category one they see
in the writings of anarchist authors a
critique of the current political
establishment and that critique may be
fruitful for them or it may be
insightful they may feel that they can
they identify things that are wrong with
the situation now the footnote here is
identifying something that's wrong with
our system of organization is very
different from having a better system on
offer to place it with I can tell you a
whole list of things that are wrong with
the stock market then you ask okay well
do you actually have a better way to
organize capital an investment that's
going to accomplish this that in the
other and it may not however on a more
modest level of course it's very
possible to just identify
problems and then meliorate those
specific problems you may just find a
form of corruption in the stock market
you can say well look I'm not trying to
replace the stock market or abolish the
stock market I just want to address
these problems it's a different kind of
analysis obviously we're talking about
Enric ISM most of these things are not
in that melee rate of category of
calling for modest social reforms the
sense in which anarchism is important as
the description of the here-and-now
category - there is also worth
commenting on a little bit I remember
once I was talking to another scholar of
history of Asia
I think his PhD was in the literature of
Asia actually and I referred to a
certain period in the history of
Buddhism as being anarchic and this was
talking about Buddhism exiting northern
India and entering western China so
you're talking about a part of the world
that now has been completely transformed
by Islam you're talking about like
Afghanistan Pakistan whose Becca Stan
and Western most parts of China know
part part of the world where you know
most of it today Buddhism has been wiped
out by Islam is the Islamic empires
centuries later exterminating indigenous
religion and converting people with the
sword and so on anyway
so I use the word anarchic to describe
the social political and religious
situation into which Buddhist ideas
first penetrated seeping out of northern
India and again India has changed shape
because Islam conquered northern India
though India used to go a lot further
north culturally and politically so
radiating up northeast out of India and
then eventually getting into these kind
of really weird wastelands of West the
western Greater China area areas that
most the historical records for China
and almost all periods refer to as being
full of barbarians
I'm reading a historical source that
said for this period of five centuries
the single most commonly used phrase in
Chinese history is barbarians attacked
the western frontier and he had the
number like you
period of five hundred years three
thousand times or something that Francis
um so you know I was using the word
anarchic I was talking about anarchy in
a very factually descriptive way I
remember this guy with a PhD he just
sneered at me and laughed at me so what
do you mean like in this sense I'm not
using in a pejorative sense you know I
can be very important to talk
descriptively about how human beings
exist what happens to society in a
real-world anarchic situations where
there is no government where you know it
really is about one man and his sword
and his donkey or whoever his people are
people are surviving and I think it is
important to talk about the ways in
which Buddhism transforms uniquely in
that in that anarchic setting which took
on transformations and new meanings and
new iconography which it never would
have taken on by contrast in the very
settled hierarchical world of the Sri
Lankan aristocracy the transmission of
Buddhism going South out of India
through Sri Lanka which also eventually
reached China in Japan by the way so you
get changes in the meanings of things
too so these two categories the
analytical critical aspects of why
people talk about anarchism there's
almost no contact between them and the
more utopian project of looking to the
future and proposing that anarchism has
some some value in this way so a
question might be posed having disclosed
these different categories would it be
possible that someone sees value in
anarchism that someone thinks of
anarchism positively in the short term
as a process while rejecting the long
term goal it's it's tending towards so a
given example of what I mean here
charity in the short term as a process
to accomplish something within our
lifetimes charity is something in that
sense I can endorse however when you
look at charity in principle when you
look at charity over the
long term over centuries it's actually
something I'm opposed to I know it
sounds absurd stick with me form and
you'll see why I'm morally opposed to
living in a society where the the
generation that's alive today
the present generation at any given
point of time is beholden to the will of
deceased millionaires from the past so
as centuries go by if you have a general
situation of legislative stability you
don't have a revolution that destroys
everything then you have a person like
Bill Gates Bill Gates is a
multi-millionaire incredibly wealthy
Bill Gates creates a foundation creates
a charity with this huge amount of money
and then that charity pursues his ideals
of Education it funds education in
pursuit of his ideals and before Bill
Gates it's a long series of millionaires
who left similar funds similar requests
created similar foundations with sit
with their own philosophy of education
now obviously until recently most of
those were very conservative Christian
ideas of Education so in terms of the
philosophy of Education what's happening
now in the world of education education
policy in fact most of the money and
most of the influence is tied to the
will of deceased persons in the past and
in some cases people like Bill Gates who
are still alive today but nevertheless
their ideas have been set in stone in
well-funded institutions than that that
influence goes on forever
and there's no transparency and no
public accountability and nobody gets
elected nobody gets to question it and
what does Bill what does Bill Gates know
about education anyway to give another
example more traditional Christian
example there's a very influential
educational foundation in linguistics
and language study called si el the
Summer Institute of linguistics it was
founded by what I would call insane
Christian missionaries if you call them
normal Christian missionaries okay maybe
where you draw the dotted line between
normal and insane it's up to you but
these are conservative Christian ideas
they're they're a major influential
educational language Research Institute
but obviously when you look at that both
in
to pull it over the passage of centuries
if say okay there's something wrong with
it so someone could challenge me I'm
still Manning Theo's position here and
say well look even if you don't
subscribe to this long term more utopian
idea of where this is going to and even
if you don't agree with this in
principle in this sense
can't you see some short-term benefit in
anarchism here and now in the same way
that I can see a benefit in charity here
and now like hey right now we can form a
charity to accomplish some things for
veganism or to help the homeless or help
the poor cope with the earthquake
whatever that the purpose might be or
there's some clear benefit here and now
that makes me overlook both what's wrong
with this ideology in principle and in
terms of its long-term implications for
me it's very easy to answer no for
anarchism within that framework
I see more value short-term in basically
any other mainstream political ideology
you could name there's more that could
be accomplished by joining the
Conservative Party in 2019 you know
within our lifetimes pragmatically then
could possibly be accomplished by
joining any of the anarchist factions
that now exist so this is a so stepping
away from matters of principle and into
pragmatics I think it's really important
to note and the single most famous and
celebrated left anarchist or left-wing
anarchist during my lifetime was Noam
Chomsky is there anyone in anarchist
politics today who is more significant
than Noam Chomsky is there anyone whose
opinion matters as much as boy hard to
think of a good example here I was gonna
say something like Bernie Sanders but
that's probably setting the bar far too
high yeah okay put it in perspective
this way if you've been watching this
channel for a long time you've heard me
criticize the ideologies of
libertarianism pointing out that
libertarians on the internet really feel
that there are major influence
political ideology in the world that
they are a philosophy that they're an
approach to politics that needs to be
taken seriously in any given political
debate and if cinemas argued back
pointing out the relative historical
triviality of libertarianism look this
isn't really a major influential
political philosophy but if are on a
scale of one to ten if we rate
libertarianism like a three out of ten
then left-wing anarchism is a zero it
has no significance of all why do I say
this well libertarianism they've had
millions of dollars in support or sorry
at least hundreds of thousand dollars
they've had a lot of money given to them
by the Koch brothers the Koch brothers
are multimillionaires who are so wealthy
and influential that they've managed to
convince the mainstream press in America
to pronounce their name the Koch
brothers whereas everyone else was the
same last name including Mayor Ed Koch
quite a few famous people about that
name pronounced at Koch but not in this
case
they prefer the pronunciation Koch and
they pay a lot of money to make sure you
pronounce things what did they want -
well the the Koch brothers they took
libertarianism and kind of weaponized it
into a political ideology and they've
pushed it forward as in various contexts
and I think for example to come back to
philosophy of Education if you're
analyzing what's wrong with the American
high school system and the American
university system so leaving aside early
childhood education there actually is a
point in that debate or discussion where
someone could say fruitfully and
pointedly well what about the
libertarian approach to educational form
to education positive philosophy of
Education libertarianism for better and
for worse actually has been influential
during the last 50 years in philosophy
of education institutional education
form so if you don't know one of the
most influential ideas that libertarians
have pushed for is the idea of a voucher
system and giving parents freedom of
choice where parents are given a voucher
by the government say okay the
government will pay for you to put your
kids into a school but now you get to
choose which school you put your kids
into and then part of this is it's
normally linked to what's called a
magnet school strategy so you have one
school that specializes in science and
one that specializes in music and they
focus on different areas of excellence
and then there's actually some kind of
meaningful selection made by the parents
this philosophy also emerged out of the
unique problems of racial segregation in
the United States and from what I've
read it is an area of interest for me
but on a major area of interest there
are some successful case studies where
this approach vouchers more freedom of
choice or parents and having schools
specialize not just to say we're the
school for this neighborhood but where
they really pick different areas of
excellence that they try to pursue that
it has had positive outcomes so and
libertarianism it can be taken seriously
in that way again on a scale of one to
ten libertarianism is not a zero it's
maybe a three they've been a voice in
some of the major political debates in
our time education is not even the most
obvious or outstanding obviously it's in
economics they could discuss the most
libertarianism actually did get debated
at least around 2012 not so much in 2016
in reference to America's military
policy militarism they've had a few
different unique voices and so on where
does anarchism rank and any of this and
and Theo is specifically speaking to
left-wing anarchism what he calls left
in Turkish this is a movement that's so
marginal I mean I know Theo I know for
you you regard this as a major voice in
21st century politics okay but it's not
you're talking about a few dozen people
on forums on the internet and here on
YouTube fair enough
this is a very small very minor very
powerless movement
[Music]
well you know of course if you want to
argue that anarchists should have more
to say okay that's that's kind of a
separate argument but I think you'd have
to start by recognizing this is an
incredibly marginal political movement
and it may matter to you emotionally you
may feel there are great authors that
there are people who've meant a lot to
you in terms of the books you've read
and so on you may feel those have a lot
to offer under those three categories
either as an analysis of what's wrong
here and now is a factual description of
banana analysis of the real world he
right now or you know that third
category the more utopian the idea of
what society could be in the future if
you feel that way that's fine nobody's
gonna take that feeling away from you
but I think you have to recognize that
even compared to some popular works of
science fiction this has been very very
little influential in the 21st century
and there's no indication that it will
be more influential I don't think that
the ideas of left left-wing anarchism
have played any role in the elections
that just happened in Israel I don't
think they're having any role in the
elections that are now unfolding in
Canada I don't think they will have any
role in the upcoming elections in the
United Kingdom in England it's presumed
that quite soon England is going to have
another set of elections I won't get
into the details here and by contrast
something like libertarianism you can
actually talk about the libertarian
ideas that came up in all those other
prescription ism is is a factor even if
it's not a major or influential factor
so again on a scale of one to ten you
talk about since very close to its zero
so to come back to this idea of the the
third category thinking about the future
think about the Utopia thinking about
the objective you're working toward
utopian or not may be pragmatic Theo
said something quite interesting to me
in this very short discussion the short
interchange we had back and forth and
that is that he said he really basically
feels the endpoint the goal he wants to
work towards or the goal for him
politically is a society such as Sweden
what Sweden already has today so Sweden
is a very interesting example if you
look up Sweden in the freedom house
listings
I believe so I'll mention what freedom
of system is going I believe free Sweden
has a perfect score of 100 out of 100 so
the freedom house rankings rate civil
liberties democracy freedom in that
practical sense in different countries
around the world and they give a very
high rating to Canada on the United
States there they're above 90 out of 100
you can compare Sweden to Switzerland
and so on the freedom house rankings
they're really calibrated to notice the
small differences in oppression between
North Korea and Cambodia and Cambodia
and Thailand that that's normally where
where the attention is focused is on
countries that are either struggling to
be democratic or maybe they've been
democratic and then they've had a coup
d'etat that have gone through history
the way it's not really calibrated to
evaluate the contrast between Sweden and
Denmark but nevertheless as I recall
Sweden actually gets a perfect 100 out
of 100 score so there is a sense in
which Sweden as it exists today is is
recognized even quantitatively not just
qualitatively as an incredibly
successful society and there were a lot
of very interesting questions to ask for
is that attainable for England could
England catch up with Sweden is that
attainable for Canada could Canada catch
me and then really address the questions
what about Taiwan what about Singapore
what about China you know who really can
achieve what Sweden has achieved and
maybe the answer is everybody maybe we
can all live in a country at the same
level of democracy and freedom freedom
and a practical sense the sweetness in
at the same high quality of education
that Sweden has achieved the same
liberty of the press to criticize the
government and so on and so forth the
same kind of highly regulated economy
but it's nevertheless a free market for
profit free enterprise if you like
listen economy the the hybrid society
the sweetness created so if that's if
that's the destination because that's
what Theo has proposed and it's strange
to say but most people most people then
even a little bit of research on Sweden
I know it's gonna sound like a weird
claim I think actually most people
around the world would agree that that's
a desirable goal to move towards like if
you asked people in Japan okay do you
want to move towards a Swedish model
Government of Japan would be an
interesting one to examine because
they're also a very successful country
if you asked people in Canada if you
asked people in many different societies
be interesting to know how people in
England regard Sweden that way I don't
think they're gonna look down on Sweden
and say no that's a terrible model for a
society I think a very large percentage
of people would actually recognize that
what Sweden is accomplished in education
and policing even even in the quality of
their prisons it's under so many
different headings that are related to
democracy some of the more integral to
democracy some of the more peripheral
they would say Wow
Sweden really is a model of excellence
for us exposure okay but if if we accept
Sweden is the import point you're
working towards use debatable but for
the signals are you considered what then
is the significance of anarchism short
term as a vehicle for getting you from
your current situation to a future that
more closely resembles Sweden that to me
doesn't make sense
you know in a sense it's easier for me
to to to appreciate the anarcho
primitive vests there are Antico an
Urkel primitive s say they want to
destroy the current society and return
to a kind of Bronze Age rugged
survivalist low technology an architect
society okay so they're the endpoint is
completely different so the significance
of anarchism now destructively noise
okay I got it but if your idea of the
future or your ideal is to catch up with
Sweden there are many different
struggles there are many
political causes we can describe between
here and there but it is not clear to me
that that anarchism would be in any way
useful within our lifetimes I don't
think would be useful as an analysis as
a description nor as utopian ideal not
as a movement in any sense so for me I
have to kind of reject it all another
Lane
I won't digress to say much more with
this I don't think
Sweden is the ideal of a society I'd
want to move towards for me there were
many things that are strikingly wrong
with Swedish society but I think most
people wouldn't agree with me I just
give a really short run a Sweden to me
is a nation of alcoholics I'm really big
on sobriety I don't want to live in a
society of heavy alcohol drinkers and
that's one aspect of Swedish sure it's
really don't underestimate number of
liters of alcohol per year consumed by
sweets it's also of course a country
built on meat and dairy that kind of
diet it's also a country built on a very
Christian culture I know Swedes don't
think that's true they think they're
very secular but whatever so for me
there are many aspects of Swedish
society that leap out right now as as
being less than ideal so it's not it's
not the goal I'd work towards however I
do want to make a separate youtube video
talking about the Swedish education
system and how it is that a small
country it's not particularly wealthy
ended up with one of the best university
systems in the world
what were the decisions that were made
well you know what were what was the
kind of bureaucratic and democratic
process that led to them having
excellence in university education when
so many other countries including the
United States and Canada have a higher
education system that is frankly
terrible okay so look this video was
made in response to requests from one
person for me to speak directly on
anarchism the most positive thing I can
say view vote anarchy and anarchism is
that I understand that as that as a
literary trope many people find it
fascinating and inspirational many
people even read only debbie de Toro I
don't know the correct way to pronounce
it mind
everyone used to say henry david thoreau
but hey people read books like that and
they respond to the rugged individualism
and the anti-authoritarian attitudes and
these things um I once read a book by an
American American journalist and it
really talked about anarchism and in
terms of refusing to comply with state
authority and state power even in
situations like the Town Hall is on fire
you're in a small city or something in
the City Hall is on fire and the
government rounds people up and forces
them to join a fire brigade
to move buckets of water to throw the
City Hall I remember reading this book
and it was written in a very
inspirational way and it really argued
know if you don't have the right to
refuse if you can't refuse that and say
no I'm not your soldier I don't work for
you I don't have to pick up a bucket of
water and put out the fire that's up to
me he was really arguing if you don't
believe in that then you believe in
authoritarianism in principle and not
anarchism and his point was I mean again
this is kind of interesting to meditate
on and reflect on his point was look in
the real world from the perspective of
the government something is always on
fire something's always burning you know
it may seem to the government like the
Cuban Missile Crisis in the 1960s is the
biggest crisis in the world and all
kinds of terrible news a famine you know
what you look back later and or you
think about you maybe even if you were
alive at a time you have a little bit
more of a detached inform perspective
like come on guys these negotiations
over missiles in Cuba it's not that big
a deal even the whole the whole event of
the Great Depression when you go back
and look at the statistics for the Great
Depression United States yeah people
made this out to be such a big crisis in
the history of economic crises kind of
average-sized there's just a lot of
political propaganda about it
what were people so he says but his
point was it's always possible for the
government to manufacture a crisis or to
perceive something as a crisis and if
you don't get to use your own trigger
I remember reading that I remember
reading different different texts that
were inspired by anarchism
various ways and you know what you know
what the most extreme the most extreme
and the most sympathetic work I have
also read the Japanese anarchists and
the Japanese anarchists are more
inspiring because their work is
derivative of Max Turner - max Turner's
an egoist rather than an anarchist there
is this whole school of thought of
Japanese anarchism
and there it's even more emotionally
appealing because they're these
anarchists who are standing up against
the Emperor they're standing up against
the unfolding tragedy of the Japanese
Empire that's kind of gradually
transitioning from democracy to
dictatorship you know the the timeline
for that it's not like Germany it's not
a simple situation where the Nazis take
over and burn down the Reichstag or
something it's really not there's this
gradual transition and the anarchists in
Japan at that time are screaming no no
no don't you see this is
authoritarianism they're trying to stand
up against this seemingly irresistible
authoritarian juggernaut that that takes
Buddhist values and Taoist values and
all these traditional values and makes
this very appealing package it's
appealing also because of course it's
offering modern technology
westernization you know modernization of
Japan at that point was a big transition
forcing everyone to wear european-style
clothes rather than wearing traditional
Japanese clothes and people are seeing
airplanes for the first time and stuff
coming into their lives is hugely
forward and Technology wrapped up with
traditionalist rhetoric and values and
the anarchists of the people in Japan at
that time saying no no no and some of
them some of them were put on trial for
for plotting to assassinate the Emperor
and you I've read the history of those
trials it's very moving you can read
their poetry some of those anarchists
they wrote poetry in Japanese I read it
in English of course and you know you
have this very appealing narrative in
which ultimately the anarchists are
victims and they're the canary in the
coalmine crying out against the
authoritarianism you know in these kinds
of contexts sure you know the history of
mannerism has produced a body of
literature that people find beguiling
entertaining and and ideologically
seductive however I have to tell you I
don't believe in it it's all of those
down to and whether I'm talking about
sewage treatment or solar power or
taxation or philosophy of Education
whenever I'm talking with any real-world
application
I see no seat at the table for the
anarchists there's no sense in which the
anarchists could have or should have a
seat at the table to discuss what this
policy should be I don't think they have
anything to contribute to the discussion
a part of the fact there and in court
we're talking about left-wing anarchists
they're an incredibly weak movement but
even if they were invited to the table I
really just do not believe that they
have they have anything to offer what's
the future of Afghanistan I'm recording
this video right now this is September
19th of 2019 so the future of
Afghanistan is incredibly unpredictable
right now Donald Trump had one plan and
threw it in the garbage and tried
another plan it's totally a clear what
the Americans are gonna do it's totally
unclear what the Afghans themselves are
gonna do still unclear what the even
what the taps behind are gonna do this
is a moment when Afghanistan could go
one way or another
what's the anarchists position
Afghanistan we're gonna have that debate
let let's just say you know even in an
academic level you're gonna invite 20
different speakers through 20 different
perspectives you know maybe there is one
seat at the table for libertarianism you
know I don't sympathize the Liberty but
maybe the libertarians get to see that
maybe they really have something to say
there's a libertarian critique the war
in Afghanistan and they have some
positive suggestions future I doubt it
but if you think about all the different
political ideologies that are contending
to have a see that are contained to have
a voice I see absolutely no legitimate
voice at that table for anarchism I
don't see a legitimate voice at the
table for talking about ecological
policy right now which is very top-down
it's all about you know government
policy and government coercion it is
ultimately I see no suit the table for
you know the inner kist perspective on
reducing carbon emissions especially the
left-wing anarchist perspective
I don't see any seat at the table for
them on health care policy on the future
of universities and so and again very
fundamentally if for Theo for this one
person if for him the destination is
catching up with Sweden then how do we
get there
my answer is not anarchism